“The meek will possess the earth.”
We’re all familiar
with those words, aren’t we,
from Psalm 37:11?
No doubt, we’ve used them in the ministry
to help others have a hope for the future.
But what does it really mean
for someone to be meek?
Well, we get help
with regard to the definition
if we turn to the words of our Lord Jesus,
as recorded at Matthew 5:5.
So Matthew 5:5,
and here Jesus is recorded as saying:
“Happy are the mild-tempered,
since they will inherit the earth.”
You’ll notice
there’s a slightly different expression
that Jesus used here
as recorded in Greek
and that is being mild-tempered.
If we look at the study note,
we’ll notice a very interesting comment.
It says: “The Greek term
“does not imply cowardice or weakness.
“In the Septuagint,
the word was used
“as an equivalent for a Hebrew word
that can be translated ‘meek’ or ‘humble.’”
So we see that
because even though Jesus spoke in Hebrew
but it was recorded in Greek,
this translation of the word “mild-tempered”
is there in the text.
And “mild-tempered” helps us a little
to understand the word “meek.”
Mild-tempered means not hot-tempered
and doesn’t mean
saying someone is cold either.
It just means
that they’re balanced
with how they handle
their reaction to things.
The Insight  volume makes the comment
that being meek or mild-tempered
‘enables a person
to endure injury with patience,
‘without irritation, without resentment,
or vindictive retaliation.’
So that’s what’s involved with being meek.
The Watchtower
from which the comments are taken
reminds us that no one in this sinful world
is born with meekness.
It’s something that we need to develop,
and it’s something
that we need to keep on working on.
For example, our text refers to Moses.
Now, you notice there in the Scripture
that it doesn’t just say:
“Moses was meek.”
It doesn’t just say:
“Moses was the meekest man.”
What does it say?
He “was by far the meekest” man.
Now, that’s very interesting.
We’d all like to have that said of us,
wouldn’t we?
But when we look at what happened
just toward the end
of the 40 years in the wilderness,
we see that Moses reacted badly.
And what was it that caused him to do so?
It was because of his reaction
to persons who frustrated him, irritated him,
those who, it seemed,
always rejected the word of Jehovah.
So, what’s the lesson in this for us today?
Well, our meekness too
can be challenged in a similar way.
It can be the frustrations
of dealing with others.
Or even in these difficult times
in which we’re living now
in seeing shortages of food and medicine.
And perhaps seeing persons
with their shopping trolleys
full of items that we know
they shouldn’t have got
—so many things—
but here they are,
getting away with all this produce,
and so on.
And yet here we are,
we don’t have enough.
Well, that can be a test of meekness.
Looking at television programs
and seeing what the world leaders are saying,
what politicians are arguing about,
can also be a test of meekness.
Seeing prejudice and unfairness in our lives,
all these things
can be just like the situation with Moses.
We can be tested with regard to our meekness.
So now, here’s the question:
What will help us to remain meek?
What will help us to develop meekness?
Well, the first thing we’d like to mention
is a very important thing,
and that is for us to strengthen
our trust in Jehovah
and to put our hope in him.
So let’s go back to the words
that we mentioned in the beginning
taken from Psalm 37.
Let’s read the context,
thinking of what we just discussed
about the tests that we may face now
or even in the future
that might test our meekness.
So in Psalm 37,
let’s read verses 7-11:
“Keep silent before Jehovah
and wait expectantly for him.”
Do we see the key to maintaining meekness?
Yes, waiting on Jehovah.
Then he goes on to say:
“Do not be upset by the man
“who succeeds in carrying out his schemes.
“Let go of anger and abandon rage;
“do not become upset and turn to doing evil.
“For evil men will be done away with,
“but those hoping in Jehovah
“will possess the earth.
“Just a little while longer,
and the wicked will be no more;
“you will look at where they were,
and they will not be there.
“But the meek will possess the earth,
“and they will find exquisite delight
in the abundance of peace.”
When we read these words,
particularly at this time
in which we’re living now,
don’t they take on deeper meaning for us?
Yes, for us to show meekness,
we have to trust fully in Jehovah, our God.
We have to leave things to him.
Some things we know will only be corrected
by what Jehovah does in the near future.
So with that in mind,
let’s look at the book of Romans.
If we turn there together
to Romans chapter 12,
we notice that a similar thought
to the one described in Psalm 37
is also here in Romans chapter 12,
and let’s read together verses 17-19:
“Return evil for evil to no one.
“Take into consideration what is fine
“from the viewpoint of all men.
“If possible, as far as it depends on you,
“be peaceable with all men.
“Do not avenge yourselves, beloved,
“but yield place to the wrath;
“for it is written: ‘Vengeance is mine;
I will repay,’ says Jehovah.”
Now, when it says “yield place to the wrath,”
what does that mean?
Well, we know that The Watchtower
has helped us to see
that that’s Jehovah’s wrath.
In other words, it’s his right
to rectify
all these bad things that are happening.
So rather than presumptuously trying
to jump in and right the wrong
and try to react in a negative way
to all these bad things
that are happening around us,
some things we realize
we have to leave to Jehovah
and allow him to correct the situation.
So that’s the first point:
Strengthen our trust in Jehovah.
Yes, make sure our hope is in him.
The second point is
that we need
to actively develop humility.
Now, later, if you check the book
of Zephaniah 2:3,
it mentions there
that we need to “seek meekness,”
and it mentions “meek ones of the earth.”
But the footnote to that verse
mentions “humility,” the “humble ones.”
So obviously, then,
humility is also connected
with having a mild temper
and being meek.
How so?
Well, humility means we respect others.
And of course, included in that
is our respect of Jehovah,
allowing him to do what he needs to do
rather than us presumptuously stepping in.
And our final thought
we can find in Proverbs chapter 6.
At Proverbs 6:1-3,
here it describes a person
who is in a difficult situation.
In this case, they ‘have put up
a security for [their] neighbor,’
and now it hasn’t worked out well.
But what does it say to do in verse 3?
“Do this, my son, and free yourself,
for you have fallen
into the hand of your neighbor.”
Now, how should we react
in a situation like that?
It says: “Go and humble yourself
and urgently plead with your neighbor.”
Now, interestingly,
the Hebrew expression here,
“humble yourself,”
literally means “stamp yourself down.”
So do we see the lesson?
When we’re faced with a test
like Moses was faced with,
what should we do?
Stamp ourselves down!
Yes, hold off that hot temper.
Yes, have full trust and hope in Jehovah,
and in that way, we can be sure
that he will view us as a meek person.